hundred francs a year, interest on the little property placed in their
hands. This small sum was now applied to her maintenance. The old
people, who were growing less and less fit for business, soon found
themselves confronted by an active and capable competitor, against whom
they said hard things, all the while doing nothing to defeat him. Major
Brigaut, their friend and adviser, died six months after his friend,
the younger Madame Lorrain,--perhaps of grief, perhaps of his wounds, of
which he had received twenty-seven.

Like a sound merchant, the competitor set about ruining his adversaries
in order to get rid of all rivalry. With his connivance, the Lorrains
borrowed money on notes, which they were unable to meet, and which drove
them in their old days into bankruptcy. Pierrette's claim upon the house
in Nantes was superseded by the legal rights of her grandmother, who
enforced them to secure the daily bread of her poor husband. The house
was sold for nine thousand five hundred francs, of which one thousand
five hundred went for costs. The remaining eight thousand came to Madame
Lorain, who lived upon the income of them in a sort of almshouse at
Nantes, like that of Sainte-Perine in Paris, called Saint-Jacques, where
the two old people had bed and board for a humble payment.

As it was impossible to keep Pierrette, their ruined little
granddaughter, with them, the old Lorrains bethought themselves of her
uncle and aunt Rogron, in Provins, to whom they wrote. These Rogrons
were dead. The letter might, therefore, have easily been lost; but if
anything here below can take the place of Providence, it is the post.
Postal spirit, incomparably above public spirit, exceeds in brilliancy
of resource and invention the ablest romance-writers. When the post gets
hold of a letter, worth, to it, from three to ten sous, and does
not immediately know where to find the person to whom that letter is
addressed, it displays a financial anxiety only to be met with in very
pertinacious creditors. The post goes and comes and ferrets through all
the eighty-six departments. Difficulties only arouse the genius of the
clerks, who may really be called men-of-letters, and who set about
to search for that unknown human being with as much ardor as the
mathematicians of the Bureau give to longitudes. They literally ransack
the whole kingdom. At the first ray of hope all the post-offices in
Paris are alert. Sometimes the receiver of a missing letter is amazed at
the network of scrawled directions which covers both back and front of
the missive,--glorious vouchers for the administrative persistency
with which the post has been at work. If a man undertook what the post
accomplishes, he would lose ten thousand francs in travel, time, and
money, to recover ten sous. The letter of the old Lorrains, addressed to
Monsieur Rogron of Provins (who had then been dead a year) was conveyed
by the post in due time to Monsieur Rogron, son of the deceased, a
mercer in the rue Saint-Denis in Paris. And this is where the postal
spirit obtains its greatest triumph. An heir is always more or less
anxious to know if he has picked up every scrap of his inheritance, if
he has not overlooked a credit, or a trunk of old clothes. The Treasury
knows that. A letter addressed to the late Rogron at Provins was certain
to pique the curiosity of Rogron, Jr., or Mademoiselle Rogron, the heirs
in Paris. Out of that human interest the Treasury was able to earn sixty
centimes.

These Rogrons, toward whom the old Lorrains, though dreading to part
with their dear little granddaughter, stretched their supplicating
hands, became, in this way, and most unexpectedly, the masters of
Pierrette's destiny. It is therefore indispensable to explain both their
antecedents and their character.




II. THE ROGRONS

Pere Rogron, that innkeeper of Provins to whom old Auffray had married
his daughter by his first wife, was an individual with an inflamed face,
a veiny nose, and cheeks on which Bacchus had drawn his scarlet and
bulbous vine-marks. Though short, fat, and pot-bellied, with stout
legs and thick hands, he was gifted with the shrewdness of the Swiss
innkeepers, whom he resembled. Certainly he was not handsome, and his
wife looked like him. Never was a couple better matched. Rogron liked
good living and to be waited upon by pretty girls. He belonged to the
class of egoists whose behavior is brutal; he gave way to his vices and
did their will openly in the face of Israel. Grasping, selfish, without
decency, and always gratifying his own fancies, he devoured his earnings
until the day when his teeth failed him. Selfishness stayed by him. In
his old days he sold his inn, collected (as we have seen) all he could
of his late father-in-law's property, and went to live in the little
house in the square of Provins, bought for a trifle from the widow of
old Auffray, Pierrette's grandmother.

Rogron and his wife had about two thousand francs a year from
twenty-seven lots of land in the neighborhood of Provins, and from the
sale of their inn for twenty thousand. Old Auffray's house, though out
of repair, was inhabited just as it was by the Rogrons,--old rats
like wrack and ruin. Rogron himself took to horticulture and spent
his savings in enlarging the garden; he carried it to the river's edge
between two walls and built a sort of stone embankment across the end,
where aquatic nature, left to herself, displayed the charms of her
flora.

In the early years of their marriage the Rogrons had a son and a
daughter, both hideous; for such human beings degenerate. Put out to
nurse at a low price, these luckless children came home in due time,
after the worst of village training,--allowed to cry for hours after
their wet-nurse, who worked in the fields, leaving them shut up to
scream for her in one of those damp, dark, low rooms which serve as
homes for the French peasantry. Treated thus, the features of the
children coarsened; their voices grew harsh; they mortified their
mother's vanity, and that made her strive to correct their bad habits
by a sternness which the severity of their father converted through
comparison to kindness. As a general thing, they were left to run loose
about the stables and courtyards of the inn, or the streets of the town;
sometimes they were whipped; sometimes they were sent, to get rid of
them, to their grandfather Auffray, who did not like them. The injustice
the Rogrons declared the old man did to their children, justified them
to their own minds in taking the greater part of "the old scoundrel's"
property. However, Rogron did send his son to school, and did buy him a
man, one of his own cartmen, to save him from the conscription. As soon
as his daughter, Sylvie, was thirteen, he sent her to Paris, to make
her way as apprentice in a shop. Two years later he despatched his son,
Jerome-Denis, to the same career. When his friends the carriers and
those who frequented the inn, asked him what he meant to do with his
children, Pere Rogron explained his system with a conciseness which, in
view of that of most fathers, had the merit of frankness.

"When they are old enough to understand me I shall give 'em a kick and
say: 'Go and make your own way in the world!'" he replied, emptying his
glass and wiping his lips with the back of his hand. Then he winked at
his questioner with a knowing look. "Hey! hey! they are no greater fools
than I was," he added. "My father gave me three kicks; I shall only
give them one; he put one louis into my hand; I shall put ten in theirs,
therefore they'll be better off than I was. That's the way to do. After
I'm gone, what's left will be theirs. The notaries can find them and
give it to them. What nonsense to bother one's self about children. Mine
owe me their life. I've fed them, and I don't ask anything from them,--I
call that quits, hey, neighbor? I began as a cartman, but that didn't
prevent me marrying the daughter of that old scoundrel Auffray."

Sylvie Rogron was sent (with six hundred francs for her board) as
apprentice to certain shopkeepers originally from Provins and now
settled in Paris in the rue Saint-Denis. Two years later she was "at
par," as they say; she earned her own living; at any rate her parents
paid nothing for her. That is what is called being "at par" in the rue
Saint-Denis. Sylvie had a salary of four hundred francs. At nineteen
years of age she was independent. At twenty, she was the second
demoiselle in the Maison Julliard, wholesale silk dealers at the
"Chinese Worm" rue Saint-Denis. The history of the sister was that of
the brother. Young Jerome-Denis Rogron entered the establishment of one
of the largest wholesale mercers in the same street, the Maison Guepin,
at the "Three Distaffs." When Sylvie Rogron, aged twenty-one, had risen
to be forewoman at a thousand francs a year Jerome-Denis, with even
better luck, was head-clerk at eighteen, with a salary of twelve hundred
francs.

Brother and sister met on Sundays and fete-days, which they passed in
economical amusements; they dined out of Paris, and went to Saint-Cloud,
Meudon, Belleville, or Vincennes. Towards the close of the year 1815
they clubbed their savings, amounting to about twenty thousand francs,
earned by the sweat of their brows, and bought of Madame Guenee the
property and good-will of her celebrated shop, the "Family Sister," one
of the largest retail establishments in the quarter. Sylvie kept the
books and did the writing. Jerome-Denis was master and head-clerk both.
In 1821, after five years' experience, competition became so fierce that
it was all the brother and sister could do to carry on the business and
maintain its reputation.

Though Sylvie was at this time scarcely forty, her natural ugliness,
combined with hard work and a certain crabbed look (caused as much by
the conformation of her features as by her cares), made her seem like a
woman of fifty. At thirty-eight Jerome Rogron presented to the eyes of
his customers the silliest face that ever looked over a counter. His
retreating forehead, flattened by fatigue, was marked by three long
wrinkles. His grizzled hair, cut close, expressed in some indefinable
way the stupidity of a cold-blooded animal. The glance of his bluish
eyes had neither flame nor thought in it. His round, flat face excited
no sympathy, nor even a laugh on the lips of those who might be
examining the varieties of the Parisian species; on the contrary, it
saddened them. He was, like his father, short and fat, but his figure
lacked the latter's brutal obesity, and showed, instead, an almost
ridiculous debility. His father's high color was changed in him to the
livid flabbiness peculiar to persons who live in close back-shops, or
in those railed cages called counting-rooms, forever tying up bundles,
receiving and making change, snarling at the clerks, and repeating the
same old speeches to customers.

The small amount of brains possessed by the brother and sister had been
wholly absorbed in maintaining their business, in getting and keeping
money, and in learning the special laws and usages of the Parisian
market. Thread, needles, ribbons, pins, buttons, tailors' furnishings,
in short, the enormous quantity of things which go to make up a mercer's
stock, had taken all their capacity. Outside of their business they knew
absolutely nothing; they were even ignorant of Paris. To them the great
city was merely a region spreading around the Rue Saint-Denis. Their
narrow natures could see no field except the shop. They were clever
enough in nagging their clerks and their young women and in proving them
to blame. Their happiness lay in seeing all hands busy at the counters,
exhibiting the merchandise, and folding it up again. When they heard
the six or eight voices of the young men and women glibly gabbling the
consecrated phrases by which clerks reply to the remarks of customers,
the day was fine to them, the weather beautiful! But on the really
fine days, when the blue of the heavens brightened all Paris, and the
Parisians walked about to enjoy themselves and cared for no "goods" but
those they carried on their back, the day was overcast to the Rogrons.
"Bad weather for sales," said that pair of imbeciles.

The skill with which Rogron could tie up a parcel made him an object
of admiration to all his apprentices. He could fold and tie and see all
that happened in the street and in the farthest recesses of the shop
